*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 52233 ***

Transcriber’s Notes:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_), and text
enclosed by equal signs is in bold (=bold=).

Additional Transcriber’s Notes are at the end.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LEGEND OF DAH-NOL-YO, SQUAW ROCK


  Compliments of
  THE SAN FRANCISCO AND NORTH PACIFIC RAILWAY,
  The Picturesque Route of California.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: POMO INDIAN IN DANCING COSTUME MADE FROM THE FEATHERS OF
THE EAGLE]

For forty-six miles THE SAN FRANCISCO AND NORTH PACIFIC RAILWAY, the
Picturesque Route of California, skirts the Russian River. A few of the
many lovely views en-route are shown in this little _brochure_.

This beautiful country was once occupied by the Pomo Indians, a brave
and flourishing tribe, of whom but very few families remain. Many of
the local features are hallowed by the Indian folk-lore. The legend of
Dah-nol-yo--Squaw Rock, so charmingly written by Mrs. H. M. Carpenter,
of Ukiah, is presented to the reader.

[Illustration: DAH-NOL-YO--SQUAW ROCK.]




THE LEGEND OF DAH-NOL-YO--SQUAW ROCK.


Among the many extant Indian Legends of Squaw Rock, none has
appeared which relates to the face of stone, on the summit of this
noted mountain. The following is substantially as given by a direct
descendant of Con-che Tadi, a Pomo Chief, who lived in the shadow of
Dah-nol-yo, when time was young.

This Chief was particularly noted for preserving the peace and harmony
of his own tribe and others with which he came in contact. His faithful
squaw Ma-cha-ta (Kingfisher) devoted her time to her two sons, Ca-ba-ba
(Brave one) and Bu-tah-so (Little Bear); and as is the custom at the
present day, gathered the buckeye and acorn, as a means of subsistence,
while her lord smoked his pipe or enjoyed a nap in the sunshine. As the
sons approached manhood they were inseparable companions and partook of
the peaceful disposition of their illustrious father.

[Illustration: TWIN ROCKS, ON THE RUSSIAN RIVER--NEAR DAH-NOL-YO.]

One day, after vainly endeavoring to catch enough fish for dinner,
a very beautiful Indian woman suddenly appeared before them. When
she merely looked into the water, fish and turtles came out upon the
sand and lay at her feet. She pointed to the east and west, and all
kinds of birds and beasts were at once before her. Ca-ba-ba, the
elder son, who was to be Chief of the tribe when the Tadi went to
the “Happy Hunting Ground,” conceived the idea of making this young
woman his wife, feeling assured that at least a good living was in
store for him through this arrangement. Divining his thoughts (which
did not meet with her approval, as it is supposed she was already
enamored of Bu-tah-so,) she declared, in consequence of his selfish
motives, he should never be the Chief of his tribe, which so enraged
Ca-ba-ba that he threw a fishing spear at her. This missed its fair
mark and was buried in the bosom of Bu-tah-so. All was immediately in
darkness--thunder rolled, lightning flashed and the whole earth was
convulsed. From out the storm the woman’s voice was heard pronouncing
maledictions on the head of Ca-ba-ba and commanding him to hide
himself in Dah-nol-yo, and do penance for all time. While he suffered
in darkness, she said the face of Bu-tah-so should stand upon his
sepulchre as a warning to all evil doers. The disappearance of the
Chief’s sons and the face of one of them, engraved in stone, upon the
mountain overlooking their home, so frightened the tribe that they fled
to the north, and no tribe has since had the temerity to live in sight
of the face on Dah-nol-yo.

[Illustration: CAMP SCENE ON RUSSIAN RIVER ON LINE SAN FRANCISCO AND
NORTH PACIFIC RY.]

Here the legend ends, and we take up the threads and weave a little net
of well authenticated facts. When the San Francisco and North Pacific
Railway wound through the picturesque canyon of Che-hool-be-da-dah
(Russian River) a tunnel pierced the base of Dah-nol-yo, thus opening
the door of Ca-ba-ba’s prison and liberating him. In fear of detection,
and a return to his solitary quarters, he cautiously crept to his
childhood’s home only to find desolation. Turning his eyes to the
summit of Dah-nol-yo he was transfixed with terror at beholding the
face of Bu-tah-so looking grimly down upon him. Held by an invisible
power he gazes on, unable to turn his eyes even to the bear, deer,
quail and squirrel, that venture so near, peering in wonder at the lone
man who is to suffer on through all eternity as he keeps his silent
vigil of Dah-nol-yo.

[Illustration: POMO HUT.]

[Illustration: RUSSIAN RIVER, GUERNEVILLE IN THE DISTANCE.]

[Illustration: BOATING ON RUSSIAN RIVER.]

[Illustration: BOHEMIAN GROVE--NEAR GUERNEVILLE. These trees range from
200 to 300 feet in height.]

       *       *       *       *       *

The way to reach the Russian River and its scenic surroundings is by
the SAN FRANCISCO AND NORTH PACIFIC RAILWAY, the Picturesque Route of
California.

Continuous riding over this road does not become monotonous, owing to
the variety and constant change of scenery, traversing, as it does,
Marin, Sonoma, Russian River, Sanel and Ukiah Valleys.

The hand of man, in dotting the country with orchards, vineyards, grain
fields, homes, towns and villages, has most beautifully blended the
domestic with nature’s wildness.

From San Francisco to Ukiah, the terminus of the road, is only 113
miles.

The Counties tributary, Marin, Sonoma, Mendocino and Lake, are known
as the most fertile on the Pacific Coast. The winds from the Pacific
Ocean, tempered by the bordering coast range and redwood forests,
produce a mild and salubrious climate so enjoyable to the healthy and
refreshing to the weak.

The Hotels and Resorts, and the numerous and various mineral springs,
afford every opportunity for health and recreation.

This section is specially desirable to the home-seeker, owing to the
variety and profusion of products which can be raised, and without
irrigation; for in this section, renowned for its richness and
fertility and wonderful soil products, =there is not one acre under
irrigation=.

_Ticket Office, 650 Market Street, Chronicle Building._

_General Office, Mutual Life Building, San Francisco._

A. W. FOSTER, Pres. and Gen’l Manager.

H. C. WHITING, General Superintendent.

R. X. RYAN, Gen’l Pass’r and Frt. Agt.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

The author is Helen McCowen Carpenter (1839-1917).

This pamphlet is not dated, but a review of it appeared in _The San
Francisco Call_, Volume 81, Number 163, May 12, 1897, p. 7.

Punctuation has been made consistent.

The paragraphs beginning “One day, after ...” and “Here the legend
ends, ...” have been transposed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Legend of Dah-nol-yo, Squaw Rock, by 
Helen McCowen Carpenter

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 52233 ***
